---
layout: post
icon: file-text
title:  "The NCO Creed"
date:   2021-03-20 14:00:00 -0600
category: USMC
permalink: /usmc/nco-creed
#featuredImage: /media-library/usmc/?.jpg
commentThreadId: 57
---

I am not a fan of the new NCO Creed. It reads like it was [designed by committee](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_by_committee). The original that I memorized is the following by [Marion F. Sturkey](https://www.amazon.com/Marion-F-Sturkey/e/B000APJGFU/ref=dp_byline_cont_pop_book_1):

> I am an NCO dedicated to training new Marines and influencing the old.  I am forever conscious of each Marine under my charge, and by example will inspire him to the highest standards possible.  I will strive to be patient, understanding, just, and firm.  I will commend the deserving and encourage the wayward.
>
> I will never forget that I am responsible to my Commanding Officer for the morale, discipline, and efficiency of my men.  Their performance will reflect an image of me.

Now compare this with the new one:

> I am the backbone of the United States Marine Corps, I am a Marine Noncommissioned Officer. I serve as part of the vital link between my commander (and all officers) and enlisted Marines. I will never forget who I am or what I represent. I will challenge myself to the limit and be ever attentive to duty. I am now, more than ever, committed to excellence in all that I do, so that I can set the proper example for other Marines. I will demand of myself all the energy, knowledge and skills I possess, so that I can instill confidence in those I teach. I will constantly strive to perfect my own skills and to become a good leader. Above all I will be truthful in all I say or do. My integrity shall be impeccable as my appearance. I will be honest with myself, with those under my charge and with my superiors. I pledge to do my best to incorporate all the leadership traits into my character. For such is the heritage I have received from that long, illustrious line of professionals who have worn the bloodstripe so proudly before me. I must give the very best I have for my Marines, my Corps and my Country for though today I instruct and supervise in peace, tomorrow, I may lead in war.

I don't know about you but I fell asleep part way through. There is a difference between a creed and a job description.
Memorizing the latter I suspect would just be that: rote memorization without internalization. 
